Anatomic Features of Teeth
Contours:
The contours of teeth, including both the facial (the side facing the lips and cheeks) and lingual
(the side facing the tongue) surfaces, play a crucial role in the functionality of the oral cavity.
These contours are designed to efficiently direct food into the mouth during chewing
while also serving to protect the surrounding gum tissue from injury or irritation.
Contacts:
Contacts refer to the areas where adjacent teeth come into contact with one another.
These points of contact are vital for maintaining proper dental alignment and preventing food particles from becoming
lodged between teeth, which can lead to discomfort and dental issues such as cavities and gum disease.
Embrasures:
Embrasures are the V-shaped spaces located between the teeth, formed by the contact points.
These triangular gaps not only contribute to the overall aesthetic appearance of
the smile but also allow for the proper flow of food during
chewing.
They facilitate effective cleaning and help maintain oral hygiene by enabling the displacement of food debris.
Occlusion:
Occlusion is the term used to describe the way the
upper and lower teeth fit together when the mouth is
closed.
Proper occlusion is essential for effective biting and chewing, as it allows for optimal force distribution across the jaw.
Additionally, a well-aligned occlusion supports jaw health and can help prevent complications such as temporomandibular joint disorders (TMJ).